India, officially the Republic of India (Bhārat Gaṇarājya),[e] is a country in South Asia. It is the 
seventh-largest country by area, the second-most populous country (with over 1.2 billion people), and the most 
populous democracy in the world. It is bounded by the Indian Ocean on the south, the Arabian Sea on the 
southwest, and the Bay of Bengal on the southeast. It shares land borders with Pakistan to the west;[f] China, 
Nepal, and Bhutan to the northeast; and Myanmar (Burma) and Bangladesh to the east. In the Indian Ocean, India 
is in the vicinity of Sri Lanka and the Maldives. India's Andaman and Nicobar Islands share a maritime border 
with Thailand and Indonesia.



The Indian subcontinent was home to the urban Indus Valley Civilisation of the 3rd millennium BCE — one of the 
world's earliest civilizations.[19][g] In the following millennium, the oldest scriptures associated with 
Hinduism began to be composed. Large scale urbanization occurred on the Ganges in the first millennium BCE 
leading to the Mahajanapadas, and Buddhism and Jainism arose. Early political consolidations took place under 
the Maurya and Gupta empires; the later peninsular Middle Kingdoms influenced cultures as far as Southeast 
Asia. In the medieval era, Judaism, Zoroastrianism, Christianity, and Islam arrived, and Sikhism emerged, all 
adding to the region's diverse culture. Much of the north fell to the Delhi sultanate; the south was united 
under the Vijayanagara Empire. The country was unified in the 17th century by the Mughal Empire. In the 18th 
century, the subcontinent came under the Maratha Empire and in the 19th under the British East India Company, 
later shifting to British crown rule. A nationalist movement emerged in the late 19th century, which later, 
under Mahatma Gandhi, was noted for nonviolent resistance and led to India's independence in 1947.



In 2017, the Indian economy was the world's sixth largest by nominal GDP and third largest by purchasing power 
parity.[16] Following market-based economic reforms in 1991, India became one of the fastest-growing major 
economies and is considered a newly industrialised country. However, it continues to face the challenges of 
poverty, corruption, malnutrition, and inadequate public healthcare. A nuclear weapons state and regional 
power, it has the second largest standing army in the world and ranks fifth in military expenditure among 
nations. India is a federal republic governed under a parliamentary system and consists of 29 states and 7 
union territories. India is widely recognized for its wide cinema, rich cuisine and lush wildlife and 
vegetation. It is a pluralistic, multilingual and multi-ethnic society and is also home to a diversity of 
wildlife in a variety of protected habitats. India is a member of the ASEAN Plus mechanism.
